README.md, before:

# hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC
[![Build status](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/actions/workflows/build_on_commit.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/actions/workflows/build_on_commit.yml)
[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![paypal](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/btn/btn_donate_SM.gif)](https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_donations&business=CU2SWN2XV9SCY&currency_code=EUR&source=url)

This repository implements Field Oriented Control (FOC) for stock hoverboards. Compared to the commutation method, this new FOC control method offers superior performance featuring:
 - reduced noise and vibrations 	
 - smooth torque output and improved motor efficiency. Thus, lower energy consumption
 - field weakening to increase maximum speed range

Table of Contents
=======================

* **Wiki:** please check the wiki pages for [Getting Started](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki#getting-started) and for [Troubleshooting](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki#troubleshooting)
* [Quick build + flash script](#quick-build--flash-script)
* [Control Architecture Layers (User Intent vs Torque Domain)](#control-architecture-layers-user-intent-vs-torque-domain)
* [Hardware](#hardware)
* [FOC Firmware](#foc-firmware)
* [Example Variants](#example-variants)
* [Projects and Links](#projects-and-links)
* [Contributions](#contributions)

#### The hoverboards with mainboards also come with 2 sideboards(not [splitboards](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki/Firmware-Compatibility#split-boards)), check the following [wiki](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki/Sideboards) about this firmware

#### For the FOC controller design, see the following repository:
 - [bldc-motor-control-FOC](https://github.com/EFeru/bldc-motor-control-FOC)

#### Videos:
<table>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/IgHCcj0NgWQ" title="Hovercar" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/hovercar_intro.png"></a></td>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/gtyqtc37r10" title="Cruise Control functionality" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/cruise_control.png"></a></td>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/jadD0M1VBoc" title="Hovercar pedal functionality" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/hovercar_pedals.png"></a></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/UnlbMrCkjnE" title="Commutation vs. FOC (constant speed)" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/com_foc_const.png"></a></td> 
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/V-_L2w10wZk" title="Commutation vs. FOC (variable speed)" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/com_foc_var.png"></a></td>       
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/tVj_lpsRirA" title="Reliable Serial Communication" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/serial_com.png"></a></td>
  </tr>
</table>


---
## Quick build + flash script

Run this to pull latest changes, clean, build, and flash in one go:

```bash
./fw-update.sh
```

The script uses these defaults (overridable via env vars):

- `PROGRAMMER_CLI=/home/gijs/STMicroelectronics/STM32Cube/STM32CubeProgrammer/bin/STM32_Programmer_CLI`
- `FIRMWARE_ELF=/home/gijs/Documents/hoverboard-firmware-hack-foc/build/hover.elf`

Example with custom paths:

```bash
PROGRAMMER_CLI=/path/to/STM32_Programmer_CLI FIRMWARE_ELF=/path/to/build/hover.elf ./fw-update.sh
```


---
## Control Architecture Layers (User Intent vs Torque Domain)

The control stack is organized as layered domains to keep high-level policy independent from motor-control internals.

### Conceptual pipeline

```text
Raw Joystick Input
→ User Intent / Policy Layer
→ Longitudinal + Steering Intent
→ Torque Mapping / Mixing
→ Wheel Torque Commands
→ FOC (16 kHz motor control domain)
```

### Layer responsibilities

- **Raw Joystick/Input Domain**: acquisition and normalization of ADC/UART/PPM/PWM/Nunchuk signals into `input1/input2` raw values.
- **User Intent / Policy Layer**: input-domain interpretation of human commands into high-level longitudinal/steering intent (no torque-domain filtering here).
- **Torque Mapping / Mixing Domain**: speed-intent to torque-request conversion (gain-only P on combined vehicle speed), asymmetric ramp limiting (slow-up/fast-down), and per-wheel left/right mixing/sign mapping.
- **FOC Domain (16 kHz ISR)**: high-rate motor control internals that execute torque/voltage/speed control and PWM generation.

This separation is intentional: user interaction policy should evolve without forcing changes in torque internals or FOC timing-critical code.
In this architecture, neutral offset learning lives in the input-facing Command Filtering layer, while command deadband/sign hysteresis live in the User Intent layer; wheel-domain shaping is kept for wheel command smoothing only. Directional ZERO_LATCH is implemented as armed-on-reversal and active-at-standstill to block only opposite-direction engagement for a short guard window.

### Setpoint architecture rollout status

- Step A is complete with active command filtering ownership: neutral offset learning now runs in `command_filter` close to raw input.
- Step B is active: `DRIVE_FORWARD`/`DRIVE_REVERSE`/`ZERO_LATCH` intent-state behavior is enabled, with user-intent hysteresis (50 on / 35 off) and debug telemetry fields (`iMode`, `zLatchMs`, `zRel`) for deterministic bench validation.
- Step C (jerk/asymmetric trajectory shaping) remains intentionally pending.

### Housekeeping rules

- Any significant architectural change **must** update this README.
- High-level control policy must remain separate from motor-control internals.
- No direct joystick-to-torque shortcuts are allowed outside the User Intent layer.
- All new control behavior must enter through the User Intent layer first, then flow into torque mapping.

---
## Hardware
 
![mainboard_pinout](/docs/pictures/mainboard_pinout.png)

The original Hardware supports two 4-pin cables that originally were connected to the two sideboards. They break out GND, 12/15V and USART2&3 of the Hoverboard mainboard. Both USART2&3 support UART, PWM, PPM, and iBUS input. Additionally, the USART2 can be used as 12bit ADC, while USART3 can be used for I2C. Note that while USART3 (right sideboard cable) is 5V tolerant, USART2 (left sideboard cable) is **not** 5V tolerant.

Typically, the mainboard brain is an [STM32F103RCT6](/docs/literature/[10]_STM32F103xC_datasheet.pdf), however some mainboards feature a [GD32F103RCT6](/docs/literature/[11]_GD32F103xx-Datasheet-Rev-2.7.pdf) which is also supported by this firmware.

For the reverse-engineered schematics of the mainboard, see [20150722_hoverboard_sch.pdf](/docs/20150722_hoverboard_sch.pdf)

 
---
## FOC Firmware
 
In this firmware 3 control types are available, it can be set in config.h file via CTRL_TYP_SEL parameter:
- Commutation (COM_CTRL)
- Sinusoidal (SIN_CTRL)
- Field Oriented Control (FOC_CTRL) with the following 3 control modes that can be set in config.h file with parameter CTRL_MOD_REQ:
  - **VOLTAGE MODE(VLT_MODE)**: in this mode the controller applies a constant Voltage to the motors. Recommended for robotics applications or applications where a fast motor response is required.
  - **SPEED MODE(SPD_MODE)**: in this mode a closed-loop controller realizes the input speed RPM target by rejecting any of the disturbance (resistive load) applied to the motor. Recommended for robotics applications or constant speed applications.
  - **TORQUE MODE(TRQ_MODE)**: in this mode the input torque target is realized. This mode enables motor "freewheeling" when the torque target is `0`. Recommended for most applications with a sitting human driver.

#### Comparison between different control methods

|Control method| Complexity | Efficiency | Smoothness | Field Weakening | Freewheeling | Standstill hold |
|--|--|--|--|--|--|--|
|Commutation| - | - | ++ | n.a. | n.a. | + |
|Sinusoidal| + | ++ | ++ | +++ | n.a. | + |
|FOC VOLTAGE| ++ | +++ | ++ | ++ | n.a. | +<sup>(2)</sup> |
|FOC SPEED| +++ | +++ | + | ++ | n.a. | +++ |
|FOC TORQUE| +++ | +++ | +++ | ++ | +++<sup>(1)</sup> | n.a<sup>(2)</sup> |

<sup>(1)</sup> By enabling `ELECTRIC_BRAKE_ENABLE` in `config.h`, the freewheeling amount can be adjusted using the `ELECTRIC_BRAKE_MAX` parameter.<br/>
<sup>(2)</sup> The standstill hold functionality can be forced by enabling `STANDSTILL_HOLD_ENABLE` in `config.h`. 

In all FOC control modes, the controller features maximum motor speed and maximum motor current protection. This brings great advantages to fulfil the needs of many robotic applications while maintaining safe operation.


### Field Weakening / Phase Advance

 - By default the Field weakening is disabled. You can enable it in config.h file by setting the FIELD_WEAK_ENA = 1 
 - The Field Weakening is a linear interpolation from 0 to FIELD_WEAK_MAX or PHASE_ADV_MAX (depeding if FOC or SIN is selected, respectively)
 - The Field Weakening starts engaging at FIELD_WEAK_LO and reaches the maximum value at FIELD_WEAK_HI
 - The figure below shows different possible calibrations for Field Weakening / Phase Advance
 ![Field Weakening](/docs/pictures/FieldWeakening.png)
 
 ⚠️ If you re-calibrate the Field Weakening please take all the safety measures! The motors can spin very fast!
 Power consumption will be highly increase and you can trigger the overvoltage protection of your BMS ⚠️


### Parameters
 - All the calibratable motor parameters can be found in the 'BLDC_controller_data.c'. I provided you with an already calibrated controller, but if you feel like fine tuning it feel free to do so 
 - The parameters are represented in Fixed-point data type for a more efficient code execution
 - For calibrating the fixed-point parameters use the [Fixed-Point Viewer](https://github.com/EFeru/FixedPointViewer) tool
 - The controller parameters are given in [this table](https://github.com/EFeru/bldc-motor-control-FOC/blob/master/02_Figures/paramTable.png)


### FOC Webview

To explore the controller without a Matlab/Simulink installation click on the link below:

[https://eferu.github.io/bldc-motor-control-FOC/](https://eferu.github.io/bldc-motor-control-FOC/)

---
## Example Variants

- **VARIANT_ADC**: The motors are controlled by two potentiometers connected to the Left sensor cable (long wired)
- **VARIANT_USART**: The motors are controlled via serial protocol (e.g. on USART3 right sensor cable, the short wired cable). The commands can be sent from an Arduino. Check out the [hoverserial.ino](/Arduino/hoverserial) as an example sketch.
- Need a quick UART reference? See [Serial communication cheat sheet](/docs/serial_communication_cheatsheet.md).
- **VARIANT_NUNCHUK**: Wii Nunchuk offers one hand control for throttle, braking and steering. This was one of the first input device used for electric armchairs or bottle crates.
- **VARIANT_PPM**: RC remote control with PPM Sum signal.
- **VARIANT_PWM**: RC remote control with PWM signal.
- **VARIANT_IBUS**: RC remote control with Flysky iBUS protocol connected to the Left sensor cable.
- **VARIANT_HOVERCAR**: The motors are controlled by two pedals brake and throttle. Reverse is engaged by double tapping on the brake pedal at standstill. See [HOVERCAR wiki](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki/Variant-HOVERCAR).
- **VARIANT_HOVERBOARD**: The mainboard reads the two sideboards data. The sideboards need to be flashed with the hacked version. The balancing controller is **not** yet implemented.
- **VARIANT_TRANSPOTTER**: This is for transpotter build, which is a hoverboard based transportation system. For more details on how to build it check [here](https://github.com/NiklasFauth/hoverboard-firmware-hack/wiki/Build-Instruction:-TranspOtter) and [here](https://hackaday.io/project/161891-transpotter-ng).
- **VARIANT_SKATEBOARD**: This is for skateboard build, controlled using an RC remote with PWM signal connected to the right sensor cable.

Of course the firmware can be further customized for other needs or projects.


---
## Projects and Links

- **Original firmware:** [https://github.com/lucysrausch/hoverboard-firmware-hack](https://github.com/lucysrausch/hoverboard-firmware-hack)
- **[Candas](https://github.com/Candas1/) Hoverboard Web Serial Control:** [https://github.com/Candas1/Hoverboard-Web-Serial-Control](https://github.com/Candas1/Hoverboard-Web-Serial-Control)
- **[RoboDurden's](https://github.com/RoboDurden) online compiler:** [https://pionierland.de/hoverhack/](https://pionierland.de/hoverhack/) 
- **Hoverboard hack for AT32F403RCT6 mainboards:** [https://github.com/cloidnerux/hoverboard-firmware-hack](https://github.com/cloidnerux/hoverboard-firmware-hack)
- **Hoverboard hack for split mainboards:** [https://github.com/flo199213/Hoverboard-Firmware-Hack-Gen2](https://github.com/flo199213/Hoverboard-Firmware-Hack-Gen2)
- **Hoverboard hack from BiPropellant:** [https://github.com/bipropellant](https://github.com/bipropellant)
- **Hoverboard breakout boards:** [https://github.com/Jana-Marie/hoverboard-breakout](https://github.com/Jana-Marie/hoverboard-breakout)

<a/>

- **Bobbycar** [https://github.com/larsmm/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC-bbcar](https://github.com/larsmm/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC-bbcar)
- **Wheel chair:** [https://github.com/Lahorde/steer_speed_ctrl](https://github.com/Lahorde/steer_speed_ctrl)
- **TranspOtterNG:** [https://github.com/Jan--Henrik/transpOtterNG](https://github.com/Jan--Henrik/transpOtterNG)
- **Hoverboard driver for ROS:** [https://github.com/alex-makarov/hoverboard-driver](https://github.com/alex-makarov/hoverboard-driver)
- **Ongoing OneWheel project:** [https://forum.esk8.news/t/yet-another-hoverboard-to-onewheel-project/60979/14](https://forum.esk8.news/t/yet-another-hoverboard-to-onewheel-project/60979/14)
- **ST Community:** [Custom FOC motor control](https://community.st.com/s/question/0D50X0000B28qTDSQY/custom-foc-control-current-measurement-dma-timer-interrupt-needs-review)
- **Android app for flashed hoverborad with remote control and interface** [Usb connection required](https://github.com/elioscordo/hoverdroid)
<a/>

- **Telegram Community:** The telegram group was closed by the owners, but no problem, we already launched a copy on matrix which is better than telegram anyways :)
- **Matrix Community:** [Join the new matrix group here](https://matrix.to/#/#hooover:brunner.ninja) (we imported all old telegram messages from the past 5+ years including pictures there)

---
## Stargazers

[![Stargazers over time](https://starchart.cc/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC.svg)](https://starchart.cc/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC)

---
## Contributions

Every contribution to this repository is highly appreciated! Feel free to create pull requests to improve this firmware as ultimately you are going to help everyone. 

If you want to donate to keep this firmware updated, please use the link below:

[![paypal](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/NL/i/btn/btn_donateCC_LG.gif)](https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_donations&business=CU2SWN2XV9SCY&currency_code=EUR&source=url)

---

Commit message:

Apply boot offset safety/inhibit to steering axis too

README.md, after:

# hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC
[![Build status](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/actions/workflows/build_on_commit.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/actions/workflows/build_on_commit.yml)
[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![paypal](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/btn/btn_donate_SM.gif)](https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_donations&business=CU2SWN2XV9SCY&currency_code=EUR&source=url)

This repository implements Field Oriented Control (FOC) for stock hoverboards. Compared to the commutation method, this new FOC control method offers superior performance featuring:
 - reduced noise and vibrations 	
 - smooth torque output and improved motor efficiency. Thus, lower energy consumption
 - field weakening to increase maximum speed range

Table of Contents
=======================

* **Wiki:** please check the wiki pages for [Getting Started](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki#getting-started) and for [Troubleshooting](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki#troubleshooting)
* [Quick build + flash script](#quick-build--flash-script)
* [Control Architecture Layers (User Intent vs Torque Domain)](#control-architecture-layers-user-intent-vs-torque-domain)
* [Hardware](#hardware)
* [FOC Firmware](#foc-firmware)
* [Example Variants](#example-variants)
* [Projects and Links](#projects-and-links)
* [Contributions](#contributions)

#### The hoverboards with mainboards also come with 2 sideboards(not [splitboards](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki/Firmware-Compatibility#split-boards)), check the following [wiki](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki/Sideboards) about this firmware

#### For the FOC controller design, see the following repository:
 - [bldc-motor-control-FOC](https://github.com/EFeru/bldc-motor-control-FOC)

#### Videos:
<table>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/IgHCcj0NgWQ" title="Hovercar" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/hovercar_intro.png"></a></td>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/gtyqtc37r10" title="Cruise Control functionality" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/cruise_control.png"></a></td>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/jadD0M1VBoc" title="Hovercar pedal functionality" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/hovercar_pedals.png"></a></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/UnlbMrCkjnE" title="Commutation vs. FOC (constant speed)" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/com_foc_const.png"></a></td> 
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/V-_L2w10wZk" title="Commutation vs. FOC (variable speed)" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/com_foc_var.png"></a></td>       
    <td><a href="https://youtu.be/tVj_lpsRirA" title="Reliable Serial Communication" rel="noopener"><img src="/docs/pictures/videos_preview/serial_com.png"></a></td>
  </tr>
</table>


---
## Quick build + flash script

Use these root scripts for explicit workflows:

```bash
./build-only.sh
./flash-only.sh
./combined-build-and-flash.sh
```

Compatibility alias (still supported):

```bash
./fw-update.sh
```

Flash scripts use these defaults (overridable via env vars):

- `PROGRAMMER_CLI=/home/gijs/STMicroelectronics/STM32Cube/STM32CubeProgrammer/bin/STM32_Programmer_CLI`
- `FIRMWARE_ELF=/home/gijs/Documents/hoverboard-firmware-hack-foc/build/hover.elf`

Example with custom paths:

```bash
PROGRAMMER_CLI=/path/to/STM32_Programmer_CLI FIRMWARE_ELF=/path/to/build/hover.elf ./flash-only.sh
```


---
## Control Architecture Layers (User Intent vs Torque Domain)

The control stack is organized as layered domains to keep high-level policy independent from motor-control internals.

### Conceptual pipeline

```text
Raw Joystick Input
→ User Intent / Policy Layer
→ Longitudinal + Steering Intent
→ Torque Mapping / Mixing
→ Wheel Torque Commands
→ FOC (16 kHz motor control domain)
```

### Layer responsibilities

- **Raw Joystick/Input Domain**: acquisition and normalization of ADC/UART/PPM/PWM/Nunchuk signals into `input1/input2` raw values.
- **User Intent / Policy Layer**: input-domain interpretation of human commands into high-level longitudinal/steering intent (no torque-domain filtering here).
- **Torque Mapping / Mixing Domain**: speed-intent to torque-request conversion (gain-only P on combined vehicle speed), asymmetric ramp limiting (slow-up/fast-down), and per-wheel left/right mixing/sign mapping.
- **FOC Domain (16 kHz ISR)**: high-rate motor control internals that execute torque/voltage/speed control and PWM generation.

This separation is intentional: user interaction policy should evolve without forcing changes in torque internals or FOC timing-critical code.
In this architecture, neutral offset learning lives in the input-facing Command Filtering layer, while command deadband/sign hysteresis live in the User Intent layer; wheel-domain shaping is kept for wheel command smoothing only. Directional ZERO_LATCH is implemented as armed-on-reversal and active-at-standstill to block only opposite-direction engagement for a short guard window.

### Setpoint architecture rollout status

- Step A is complete with active command filtering ownership: neutral offset learning now runs in `command_filter` close to raw input.
- Step B is active: `DRIVE_FORWARD`/`DRIVE_REVERSE`/`ZERO_LATCH` intent-state behavior is enabled, with user-intent hysteresis (50 on / 35 off) and debug telemetry fields (`iMode`, `zLatchMs`, `zRel`) for deterministic bench validation. `ZERO_LATCH` arm/activate/release decisions are based on measured speed (`speedAvg`) entering/leaving near-zero, not on setpoint reaching zero.
- Step C is active: `velocity_setpoint_layer` now enforces asymmetric trajectory shaping (slow-up / fast-down) with per-loop slew limits and a measured-speed slip-gap clamp (`slip`).


### Neutral offset calibration behavior (current implementation)

- At boot, command filtering runs deterministic two-stage offset calibration for **both longitudinal and steering** axes:
  - **0–1 s settle window**: no sampling, just wait for input interface startup jitter to settle.
  - **1–2 s sample window**: average raw command samples per axis.
- At the end of sampling, each axis latches its averaged neutral offset (clamped by `COMMAND_FILTER_OFFSET_MAX`).
- **Safety latch**: while either axis is still in boot calibration, torque command is force-suppressed to zero (`calibI=1` in debug), so no drive torque is sent to the wheels during calibration.
- After boot calibration is locked, bounded adaptive recentering is still available in near-neutral zone for slow drift compensation.

### Housekeeping rules

- Any significant architectural change **must** update this README.
- High-level control policy must remain separate from motor-control internals.
- No direct joystick-to-torque shortcuts are allowed outside the User Intent layer.
- All new control behavior must enter through the User Intent layer first, then flow into torque mapping.

---
## Hardware
 
![mainboard_pinout](/docs/pictures/mainboard_pinout.png)

The original Hardware supports two 4-pin cables that originally were connected to the two sideboards. They break out GND, 12/15V and USART2&3 of the Hoverboard mainboard. Both USART2&3 support UART, PWM, PPM, and iBUS input. Additionally, the USART2 can be used as 12bit ADC, while USART3 can be used for I2C. Note that while USART3 (right sideboard cable) is 5V tolerant, USART2 (left sideboard cable) is **not** 5V tolerant.

Typically, the mainboard brain is an [STM32F103RCT6](/docs/literature/[10]_STM32F103xC_datasheet.pdf), however some mainboards feature a [GD32F103RCT6](/docs/literature/[11]_GD32F103xx-Datasheet-Rev-2.7.pdf) which is also supported by this firmware.

For the reverse-engineered schematics of the mainboard, see [20150722_hoverboard_sch.pdf](/docs/20150722_hoverboard_sch.pdf)

 
---
## FOC Firmware
 
In this firmware 3 control types are available, it can be set in config.h file via CTRL_TYP_SEL parameter:
- Commutation (COM_CTRL)
- Sinusoidal (SIN_CTRL)
- Field Oriented Control (FOC_CTRL) with the following 3 control modes that can be set in config.h file with parameter CTRL_MOD_REQ:
  - **VOLTAGE MODE(VLT_MODE)**: in this mode the controller applies a constant Voltage to the motors. Recommended for robotics applications or applications where a fast motor response is required.
  - **SPEED MODE(SPD_MODE)**: in this mode a closed-loop controller realizes the input speed RPM target by rejecting any of the disturbance (resistive load) applied to the motor. Recommended for robotics applications or constant speed applications.
  - **TORQUE MODE(TRQ_MODE)**: in this mode the input torque target is realized. This mode enables motor "freewheeling" when the torque target is `0`. Recommended for most applications with a sitting human driver.

#### Comparison between different control methods

|Control method| Complexity | Efficiency | Smoothness | Field Weakening | Freewheeling | Standstill hold |
|--|--|--|--|--|--|--|
|Commutation| - | - | ++ | n.a. | n.a. | + |
|Sinusoidal| + | ++ | ++ | +++ | n.a. | + |
|FOC VOLTAGE| ++ | +++ | ++ | ++ | n.a. | +<sup>(2)</sup> |
|FOC SPEED| +++ | +++ | + | ++ | n.a. | +++ |
|FOC TORQUE| +++ | +++ | +++ | ++ | +++<sup>(1)</sup> | n.a<sup>(2)</sup> |

<sup>(1)</sup> By enabling `ELECTRIC_BRAKE_ENABLE` in `config.h`, the freewheeling amount can be adjusted using the `ELECTRIC_BRAKE_MAX` parameter.<br/>
<sup>(2)</sup> The standstill hold functionality can be forced by enabling `STANDSTILL_HOLD_ENABLE` in `config.h`. 

In all FOC control modes, the controller features maximum motor speed and maximum motor current protection. This brings great advantages to fulfil the needs of many robotic applications while maintaining safe operation.


### Field Weakening / Phase Advance

 - By default the Field weakening is disabled. You can enable it in config.h file by setting the FIELD_WEAK_ENA = 1 
 - The Field Weakening is a linear interpolation from 0 to FIELD_WEAK_MAX or PHASE_ADV_MAX (depeding if FOC or SIN is selected, respectively)
 - The Field Weakening starts engaging at FIELD_WEAK_LO and reaches the maximum value at FIELD_WEAK_HI
 - The figure below shows different possible calibrations for Field Weakening / Phase Advance
 ![Field Weakening](/docs/pictures/FieldWeakening.png)
 
 ⚠️ If you re-calibrate the Field Weakening please take all the safety measures! The motors can spin very fast!
 Power consumption will be highly increase and you can trigger the overvoltage protection of your BMS ⚠️


### Parameters
 - All the calibratable motor parameters can be found in the 'BLDC_controller_data.c'. I provided you with an already calibrated controller, but if you feel like fine tuning it feel free to do so 
 - The parameters are represented in Fixed-point data type for a more efficient code execution
 - For calibrating the fixed-point parameters use the [Fixed-Point Viewer](https://github.com/EFeru/FixedPointViewer) tool
 - The controller parameters are given in [this table](https://github.com/EFeru/bldc-motor-control-FOC/blob/master/02_Figures/paramTable.png)


### FOC Webview

To explore the controller without a Matlab/Simulink installation click on the link below:

[https://eferu.github.io/bldc-motor-control-FOC/](https://eferu.github.io/bldc-motor-control-FOC/)

---
## Example Variants

- **VARIANT_ADC**: The motors are controlled by two potentiometers connected to the Left sensor cable (long wired)
- **VARIANT_USART**: The motors are controlled via serial protocol (e.g. on USART3 right sensor cable, the short wired cable). The commands can be sent from an Arduino. Check out the [hoverserial.ino](/Arduino/hoverserial) as an example sketch.
- Need a quick UART reference? See [Serial communication cheat sheet](/docs/serial_communication_cheatsheet.md).
- **VARIANT_NUNCHUK**: Wii Nunchuk offers one hand control for throttle, braking and steering. This was one of the first input device used for electric armchairs or bottle crates.
- **VARIANT_PPM**: RC remote control with PPM Sum signal.
- **VARIANT_PWM**: RC remote control with PWM signal.
- **VARIANT_IBUS**: RC remote control with Flysky iBUS protocol connected to the Left sensor cable.
- **VARIANT_HOVERCAR**: The motors are controlled by two pedals brake and throttle. Reverse is engaged by double tapping on the brake pedal at standstill. See [HOVERCAR wiki](https://github.com/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC/wiki/Variant-HOVERCAR).
- **VARIANT_HOVERBOARD**: The mainboard reads the two sideboards data. The sideboards need to be flashed with the hacked version. The balancing controller is **not** yet implemented.
- **VARIANT_TRANSPOTTER**: This is for transpotter build, which is a hoverboard based transportation system. For more details on how to build it check [here](https://github.com/NiklasFauth/hoverboard-firmware-hack/wiki/Build-Instruction:-TranspOtter) and [here](https://hackaday.io/project/161891-transpotter-ng).
- **VARIANT_SKATEBOARD**: This is for skateboard build, controlled using an RC remote with PWM signal connected to the right sensor cable.

Of course the firmware can be further customized for other needs or projects.


---
## Projects and Links

- **Original firmware:** [https://github.com/lucysrausch/hoverboard-firmware-hack](https://github.com/lucysrausch/hoverboard-firmware-hack)
- **[Candas](https://github.com/Candas1/) Hoverboard Web Serial Control:** [https://github.com/Candas1/Hoverboard-Web-Serial-Control](https://github.com/Candas1/Hoverboard-Web-Serial-Control)
- **[RoboDurden's](https://github.com/RoboDurden) online compiler:** [https://pionierland.de/hoverhack/](https://pionierland.de/hoverhack/) 
- **Hoverboard hack for AT32F403RCT6 mainboards:** [https://github.com/cloidnerux/hoverboard-firmware-hack](https://github.com/cloidnerux/hoverboard-firmware-hack)
- **Hoverboard hack for split mainboards:** [https://github.com/flo199213/Hoverboard-Firmware-Hack-Gen2](https://github.com/flo199213/Hoverboard-Firmware-Hack-Gen2)
- **Hoverboard hack from BiPropellant:** [https://github.com/bipropellant](https://github.com/bipropellant)
- **Hoverboard breakout boards:** [https://github.com/Jana-Marie/hoverboard-breakout](https://github.com/Jana-Marie/hoverboard-breakout)

<a/>

- **Bobbycar** [https://github.com/larsmm/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC-bbcar](https://github.com/larsmm/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC-bbcar)
- **Wheel chair:** [https://github.com/Lahorde/steer_speed_ctrl](https://github.com/Lahorde/steer_speed_ctrl)
- **TranspOtterNG:** [https://github.com/Jan--Henrik/transpOtterNG](https://github.com/Jan--Henrik/transpOtterNG)
- **Hoverboard driver for ROS:** [https://github.com/alex-makarov/hoverboard-driver](https://github.com/alex-makarov/hoverboard-driver)
- **Ongoing OneWheel project:** [https://forum.esk8.news/t/yet-another-hoverboard-to-onewheel-project/60979/14](https://forum.esk8.news/t/yet-another-hoverboard-to-onewheel-project/60979/14)
- **ST Community:** [Custom FOC motor control](https://community.st.com/s/question/0D50X0000B28qTDSQY/custom-foc-control-current-measurement-dma-timer-interrupt-needs-review)
- **Android app for flashed hoverborad with remote control and interface** [Usb connection required](https://github.com/elioscordo/hoverdroid)
<a/>

- **Telegram Community:** The telegram group was closed by the owners, but no problem, we already launched a copy on matrix which is better than telegram anyways :)
- **Matrix Community:** [Join the new matrix group here](https://matrix.to/#/#hooover:brunner.ninja) (we imported all old telegram messages from the past 5+ years including pictures there)

---
## Stargazers

[![Stargazers over time](https://starchart.cc/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC.svg)](https://starchart.cc/EFeru/hoverboard-firmware-hack-FOC)

---
## Contributions

Every contribution to this repository is highly appreciated! Feel free to create pull requests to improve this firmware as ultimately you are going to help everyone. 

If you want to donate to keep this firmware updated, please use the link below:

[![paypal](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/NL/i/btn/btn_donateCC_LG.gif)](https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_donations&business=CU2SWN2XV9SCY&currency_code=EUR&source=url)

---
